timestamp pruning guide [docs] (#3241)
quickwit-oss/quickwit: docs/guides/timestamp-pruning.md

---
title: Timestamp pruning
sidebar_position: 4
---

> Quickwit indexes documents in bacthing fashion by outputing self contained index files called [splits](https://quickwit.io/docs/overview/architecture/#splits). Overtime, the number of splits created in a Quickwit index grows as long as new documents are being indexed. This number of splits linearly hurts query performance because Quickwit needs to examine all the splits in an index during query execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quickwit indexes documents in batching fashion by outputting self-contained index files called [splits](../architecture/#splits). Over time, the number of splits created in a Quickwit index grows as long as new documents are being indexed. This number of splits linearly hurts query performance because Quickwit needs to examine all the splits in an index during query execution.
```

we need to use relative path for the docs

-d '{"query": "severity_text:ERROR AND timestamp:[2002-10-02T15:00:00Z TO 2002-10-02T18:00:00Z]", "start_timestamp":1680879600, "end_timestamp":1680890400}' \
http://127.0.0.1:7280/api/v1/hdfs/search
 ```

:::caution
Using timestamp pruning should be explicitly requested by specifying the aforementioned search query parameters. Contrary to what you might expect, timestamp pruning does not kick in when using solely the timestamp field in your search query. 
Aside from other pruning techniques employed in Quickwit, the following query for example will examine all splits in the index, because it does not specifies any timestamp query parameter. 

```bash
curl -X POST -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-d '{"query": "severity_text:error AND timestamp:[2002-10-02T15:00:00Z TO 2002-10-02T18:00:00Z]"}' \
http://127.0.0.1:7280/api/v1/hdfs/search
```
:::

We understand that it's not convenient:

- To use another set of parameters to take advantage of timestamp pruning. Extracting these from the search query feels more natural.
- To specify timestamp pruning parameters only in timestamp `seconds`. Supporting other datetime formats would yield a better user experience.

> These are known [issues](https://github.com/quickwit-oss/quickwit/issues/3169) we intend to address in an up-coming version of Quickwit.

Reviewer 2: this part may become wrong in a very close future, see #3400 .
